[AUDIO LOGO]
>> Sometimes it's like Velcro.
It's like you feel
yourself peeling away
and you're like, whoa.
And you look back
at yourself and you
see yourself lying there.
>> We have the ability to
navigate all of the realms.
We are made of light, just
holographic constructs
of consciousness
expressing itself
as an individualized
essence of divinity.
>> Where ancient wisdom and
modern research converge,
Divine Science emerges.
For centuries,
cultures worldwide
have described the ability
to leave the physical body
and a journey
beyond, an experience
known as astral
projection, often
reported during deep meditation,
near-death experiences,
and even on the cusp
of sleep states.
This phenomenon challenges
our conventional understanding
of reality.
While similar to lucid dreaming,
where one becomes aware
within the dream,
astral projection
is considered a
distinct phenomenon
that may occur spontaneously
or be entered intentionally,
involving a journey beyond the
confines of the physical body.
Could these
intersecting experiences
deepen our understanding of the
very nature of consciousness
itself?
>> Astral projection is
the capacity of the person
to leverage the faculties of
the astral body to reposition
their perception
into a new location.
Astral projection
and astral travel
are essentially the same thing.
We just have different
levels of depth
that someone may
choose to embark
on this kind of experience.
So for example, at
the lightest level,
astral projection
and astral travel
is simply a
projection of thought.
It's me imagining myself in
the other side of this room
right now, and beginning
to have that experience.
At the deepest level,
it's putting my body
all the way into a complete,
restful zero-point state,
and moving my entire
consciousness out of my body
and across a room to have
a different experience.
>> I would say that astral
travel is floating around,
which you're sitting on a pure
level of consciousness and you
allow your consciousness to
flow to wherever it wants--
and it enjoys floating
here and there.
But astral projection
is when you
would say, I want
my attention to go
to see what's happening
with my friend,
in this situation,
and even project
yourself to the past
or project yourself
to the future,
because time and space are
no more a limiting factor.
So from the level
of consciousness.
And if you go to the level
of pure consciousness, which
is beyond time and
space, then you
can project yourself
to experience
what will happen in the
future, what is happening now,
what has happened before.
And that is the simple
reality of consciousness
being projected to
different places
or different circumstances.
>> Astral is the esoteric term,
but it does feel like energy.
And in the yogic
tradition, they might call
it bio-energy or a subtle body.
We feel like we have some
sort of malleable energy,
and this form can be
the shape of the body
or you can be a point of
awareness, kind of like an orb.
And this can be very
big and very small.
And then this kind of
moves into other planes
or what appears to be
different sorts of realities.
So the three parts are
a sense of separation,
feeling like we
have another body,
and then traveling to other
realms of reality, planes
of existence, and retrieving
some sort of information, often
that benefits our lives.
>> You can't talk about astral
projection without understanding
your soul.
You have a body, and inside
your body is your soul.
But it's the same
essence I believe
that you use to go and travel
in your astral reality.
So you go to different places.
You feel yourself hovering.
Who are you?
You are your soul.
That soul then comes back
into your physical body,
and you, for the most
part, are consciously
aware that you experienced
this amazing trek
to another place on the
planet, or sometimes
even on other planets.
And again, many people
learn to astral project.
Some people do it naturally.
Many people do it and are
totally unaware that they're
doing it on a regular basis.
>> Many individuals
experience astral projection
unintentionally through deep
relaxation or altered awareness,
often realizing they've
projected only after
the experience concludes,
recalling sensations
of floating, traveling,
or observing from outside
themselves.
But how does one
intentionally enter this state
and navigate the unseen realms?
>> In the traditional occult
practice of astral projection,
a practitioner would
lay their body down,
get into a theta state
essentially where their body is
almost asleep, and then begin to
intentionally move their astral
awareness up and out of their
body and then across the room.
>> Astral projection is
done in the mind awake,
body asleep state.
So this is when the body
is completely relaxed.
We cannot feel it.
We have total body dissolution,
but the mind is awake and aware.
This is often on
the cusp of sleep
where most people have
spontaneous out-of-body
experiences.
Body falling asleep,
mind awake, and then they
might feel like they're floating
out of the physical body.
But this can be in any situation
where the body is falling asleep
or where it feels like
it's in a state of panic
where it needs to cope.
>> While many experience astral
projection spontaneously,
ancient traditions have
cultivated it as a deliberate
practice.
Egyptian, Vedic,
Tibetan, and Shamanic
teachings describe
methods of journeying
beyond the physical
form for wisdom,
healing, and remote
perception-- foundations that
continue to inspire
modern approaches today.
>> There are many practical
uses for astral projection.
For myself, I experienced that I
could leverage astral projection
to be a better driver.
Simply by projecting my
consciousness forward
down the highway, I could
feel if there's traffic,
I could feel if there's a
car coming around the curve
when I'm driving
on a mountain road.
There are many
different ways I could
use the extension
of my consciousness
in different ways in
different directions,
to enhance my ability to respond
and react and move more quickly.
It's also very useful in
things like martial arts,
because you can anticipate the
move of the other individual
by sensing the astral mental
intent before their body
actually acts.
>> We know they occur
for two reasons.
The first is for survival
as a coping mechanism.
So if we are at a
crossroads in our life
or we've had an accident
or we're giving birth
and we're in labor, we can have
these spontaneous out-of-body
experiences that are for I need
to get a bigger bird's eye view,
see what's happening.
I need to be able to
remove myself to be
able to cope with what's here.
But the second reason--
and this is the one that
people do not talk about,
is evolutionary.
So in deep meditation,
they happen spontaneously.
In the yogic tradition,
it's considered a siddhi,
a superpower that often
happens through many years
of experience, of mindfulness,
of spiritual practice.
And also they can happen just
at a poignant time in our lives.
And this is because we come
out of body, we see something,
feel something, hear
something, retrieve
an inner knowsis, an
inner knowing that
deeply affects our lives.
And then there's a transition.
There's a shift
in consciousness.
And when we come
back to our body,
we are more reliant,
perhaps with our purpose.
And then that allows us to
self-actualize into existence
a more fulfilled or more
joyful, better life.
>> It depends on the soul's
goal in life to evolve
or to experience.
Some of it comes from
the mental states,
which is why many people
learn to astral project
by focusing on certain desires
that they want to go experience
or they want to go see.
Sometimes, though, the soul--
and I would say a
higher spirit guide
is in control, taking
you to places of learning
and places of
greater understanding
that you can bring
back to this reality
and help you while
you live here.
>> Researchers have sought
to understand the underlying
mechanisms of astral projection.
Studies on out-of-body
experiences
suggest that certain
individuals may be naturally
predisposed, those
with heightened
sensitivity or a strong
openness to new experiences.
Could these traits
provide insight
into why some can more easily
induce astral projection
while others struggle
to achieve it?
>> So 10% of the population
actually have out-of-body
experiences spontaneously.
So this means it's a
natural human experience.
So everyone can do it.
But there are some people that
find it easier than others.
So these are known as
trans liminal people.
How do if you're a
trans liminal person?
You might be extra sensitive.
It means that you are deeply
connected to the threshold
of what is beneath
your consciousness
beneath the surface.
Another reason for
out-of-body experiences
in a lot of the population would
be if on the psychology scale,
you score quite high on being
open to new experiences,
you're a risk taker.
You have the ability to
step into the unknown,
without being too
scared, you're more
likely to have an
out-of-body experience.
If out-of-body experiences
are a natural part
of human experience,
what happens in the brain
when they occur?
Research using neurofeedback
devices like the mind mirror
reveals a fascinating
pattern, one that challenges
conventional neuroscience.
Instead of heightened
activity, as seen
in dreaming or deep
meditation, the brainwaves
of experienced astral travelers
appear to quiet dramatically,
as if consciousness itself
is shifting elsewhere,
raising new questions about
the nature of the mind.
>> Non-local consciousness,
having no time in it,
has a curious way of showing
up on the mind mirror
and in our session's Discovery
programs at the Monroe
Institute.
I have seen countless
times people
have this beautiful
awakened mind pattern,
high, high amplitude.
And all of a sudden, their
brainwaves just disappear.
They don't flatline.
They turn into these very,
very low amplitude patterns.
It lasts for maybe 10
seconds, and then boom,
they're back out again.
The first time I saw
it, I said, well, I
think somebody went on
an out-of-body journey
and there was nobody
home in the brain
because the brainwaves
have disappeared.
The curious thing about it
is that, that 10 seconds,
I saw their
amplitudes decreased.
They were in an out-of-body
state touring the world,
landing at the
pyramids, seeing an eye
in the top of the pyramids
walking with the spirit
guide having all
of these incredibly
elaborate, detailed,
vivid experiences.
And it was only
10 seconds for me.
>> While out-of-body experiences
have long been described
as mystical, emerging research
is uncovering their neurological
foundations.
Studies using fMRI
reveal that OBEs
involve key regions
of the brain linked
to self-processing and spatial
awareness, particularly
the Temporal Parietal
Junction, TPJ,
the cerebellum, and the
supramarginal and posterior
superior temporal gyri.
These areas help construct our
sense of physical presence.
And when disrupted, they
may allow consciousness
to shift beyond the body's
perceived boundaries.
Yet for many who
experience OBEs,
the impact goes far
beyond neuroscience,
triggering profound
transformations
in identity, relationships,
and even a fundamental shift
in how they view life and death.
>> In a peer reviewed
paper that I wrote,
I looked at the transformative
effects of what happens after
you have an
out-of-body experience.
So I took a group
of healthy people,
and then we asked them many
different sorts of questions,
and we measured their experience
using lots of different scales.
Afterwards, there were
eight changes that no matter
what the content
of the experience,
no matter what they saw or felt,
they all had the same things.
The experience was a
motivational catalyst.
So basically after
they had it, there
was a big change in their life.
This could be with their
relationship or their career
or something else.
Then there was a
reduced fear of death.
Some of them didn't
fear death at all.
The third one was a
reevaluation of relationships.
So basically, people
reflecting back
on who is in their life, their
partner, their friends, and they
created new, better,
healthier friendships.
Another one was
increased inner peace.
So this idea of feeling
more inner peace
was one of the
transformative effects.
The fifth one is people also
gained a new perspective
on life.
Another of the
transformative effects
was increased self-awareness
and a sense of individuality.
And the last one is
that they developed
spiritual beliefs,
especially some
of the agnostics and
atheists suddenly
developed spiritual beliefs.
And so, from the
out-of-body experience,
why it is so transformative
is because you
have this shift
in self-identity,
this kind of domino effect,
like a snowball that
then leads to these
different life changes.
There's a huge amount of very
simple and subtle enhancements
to almost anything we
want to do in our life
through strengthening our
capacity for astral projection.
But it's also about an
exploration of the self.
The deeper occult studies
of astral projection
were about allowing
ourselves to be
more than just
the physical body,
to get beyond the limit
of where we are and start
to see at deeper levels.
If you go to a place
like Stonehenge
and you just look at
the physical matter,
you're only seeing a
tiny, tiny percentage
of the information
that's actually there
and is present all around you.
When you're able to
use your astral form
and look at those stones, you'll
see ancient symbols held inside
of them.
You'll hear the songs
of the druids that
danced among the stones.
You will feel the
energetic currents that
were woven in those places.
So astral travel,
astral projection,
building these
skills can actually
enhance our spiritual
perception of reality.
>> Esoteric traditions have long
taught methods to refine astral
projection, strengthening
perception beyond the physical
senses.
Interestingly, modern
research suggests
that the temporal parietal
junction or TPJ, the brain
region responsible for spatial
awareness and self-location
plays a key role in
out-of-body experiences.
Could these techniques
actively train the mind
to expand perception, bridging
ancient wisdom with emerging
scientific insights?
>> There's a particular
technique for mastering astral
projection that a gentleman
named Ophiel created many years
ago, and the technique is
creating a series of alters
where you would place a visual
object -playing cards are very
useful for that- along with
a physical, sensory object,
something that has a particular
smell and something that has
a particular taste, as well as
something that makes a sound.
And then later when having
your meditation in the morning,
you travel with your
mind over to that altar
and you ring the bell,
you taste the candy,
you smell the lavender,
you look at the card,
and you're developing
your ability
to use those senses
from your mental body.
And now when you
astral travel, you'll
begin hearing things, smelling
things, tasting things.
You'll also notice that
you begin experiencing
those things in your dreams.
>> The super cool thing about
out-of-body experiences is that
it can be induced.
So you can do them
at will very safely.
And I use something
called state stacking.
So it's stacking
different altered states.
Some things work better for
some people and not others.
So if you're a
very visual person,
it might be that certain
visualizations work well
coupled with self-hypnosis
amongst maybe
breathwork, binaural beats,
and sensory deprivation.
So there are three steps--
the mind awake body asleep
state, the vibrational state,
and then the exit technique.
And at each of these points,
there are various exercises
that you can apply that
you stack to then be
able to have that experience.
But then once you've gone
out of the body or beyond it,
you've got the navigation,
you've got the control,
you've got your intention, your
plan, what do you want to do?
So I say to people, OK,
have a projection plan.
What's your intention?
Your intention being,
what am I going to do?
But, and this is the
secret to success,
why am I going to do it?
What's my motivation?
And having a pure motivation
is super important
because if you do believe in
a higher power or a spirit
guides or the universe
or even if you just
believe in the power of
your own conscious mind,
that's going to get
on board if you've
got a very good reason for
doing it, like healing trauma,
for example.
>> If consciousness
is non-local,
existing beyond
the physical brain,
then the astral body may not
be leaving the physical form,
but tapping into a larger
system that encodes information,
emotions, and experiences
across space and time.
Could the very
structure of reality
support and facilitate
these journeys?
>> In my work in
unified physics,
I've theorized that
protons are hard drives,
and that they're all networked
and linked with each other
through entanglement.
When you start to see that
matter works and operates
this way, you start to wonder,
how does all that information
get experienced through
our conscious bodies?
Well, it turns out
that we experience
the vibrational levels of that
information as our emotions,
and so our astral
bodies can literally
use the network of the
structure of space time
to be able to exchange
and gather information
where our brains are working
to create the holographic map
of that experience.
>> If we believe that astral
projection is going somewhere
other than our own
body or our own mind,
that we're entering a different
space, a different plane, realm,
existence, then theories of
non-local consciousness heavily
support out-of-body experiences.
You've got non-local
consciousness,
which allow for that person to
go into different time space
periods.
So assuming these
theories are true,
that 100% would evidence
out-of-body experiences
and what people report.
>> Once you master the
field of consciousness,
this is when you can transport
your consciousness through
attention to different aspects
and then influence those
aspects.
So consciousness is not
something limited in my body.
If you take it to a deeper level
and know that consciousness
is non-local, then you can
understand the possibility
of traveling with your awareness
and call it astral travel,
if you like.
>> If consciousness can
extend beyond the body,
can science measure its impact?
Researchers are now testing
how self-induced out-of-body
experiences may influence
not just perception, but even
cellular biology, paving
the way for groundbreaking
therapeutic applications.
>> We're now looking at the
world's first long-term study
on how if you have the OBE,
out-of-body experience,
you self-induce it, it can
affect your well-being and be
sustainable in terms
of the transformation.
So I'm leading a study
where we look at that.
And we're going to look
at their cells, their DNA
before the OBE, out-of-body
experience and after.
And we're going
to look at OK, how
is this experience
influencing, if at all,
the expression of your genes,
the very cells of your DNA?
Now we know transpersonal
experiences,
these kind of big spiritual
big awakening experiences,
they do change the
expression of your genes.
We know that in science.
So, what is the most radical
transpersonal experience
you can have?
An out-of-body experience.
So we're going to
have a look at this
and then see how it
affects the cells.
And one of the
inspirations for this
is actually
Indigenous traditions
because they look at healing
intergenerational trauma
through astral projection.
We're going to
take those findings
and create a therapeutic model
that we're going to pilot
in healthcare settings.
I think it could be a revolution
in mental health and well being.
>> Scientific inquiry into
out-of-body experiences is
uncovering far
reaching implications,
not just for healing, but for
how we understand the nature
of consciousness itself.
If these experiences can alter
biology at a cellular level,
could they also reveal the
deeper, multidimensional nature
of our existence?
>> So we can say that we are
beings of many different bodies,
at many different levels.
And we're just
experiencing reality
through one
interface or another.
And we have the ability to
navigate all of the realms
simply because we
are made of light
and we're all just
holographic constructs
of consciousness
expressing itself
as an individualized
essence of divinity.
>> If there's one thing I could
leave you with, it's this.
Everybody can astral project.
And when you do, it is
so incredible and magic.
And you can use it for
self-empowerment, self-growth,
and infinite potential.
>> Astral projection
transcends mere altered states.
It offers a striking
journey into unseen realms
as science delves deeper into
its transformative potential.
This phenomenon reframes
our understanding
of consciousness and reality,
hinting at mysteries yet
to be fully explored.
Join us for more episodes
on Divine Science,
where we explore the
crossroads of modern research
and ancient wisdom.